Extensions/v0.7 extensions (#86)
kwilteam/docs: docs/extensions/kuneiform-precompiles/precompiles.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 1
sidebar_label: "Precompiles"
id: precompiles
title: Kuneiform Precompiles
description: Extend Kuneiform with custom precompiles.
slug: /extensions/precompiles
---

> Kuneiform precompiles are custom libraries that can be imported and called in Kuneiform schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuneiform precompiles are custom libraries that can be imported and called in Kuneiform actions.
```

By implementing custom action precompiles, developers can add support for new functionality to their Kwil network's Kuneiform language.
These functionalities are wide ranging, and can include anything from performing hashing algorithms to directly calling the active Postgres connection.

## How Precompiles Work

Action precompiles are implemented as Go libraries that are loaded into the Kwil node at startup. All precompiles are globally available to all Kuneiform schemas.
There are two distinct steps in an action precompile's lifecycle:

> 1. **Initialize**: The action precompile is imported into a Kuneiform schema. It is given a set of initialization values, and a name by which it can be called. Initialize is called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Initialize**: The action precompile is imported into a Kuneiform schema. It is given a set of initialization values, and an alias by which it can be called. Initialize is called
```

I feel like alias more clearly indicates this is how it is being named in kuneiform, rather than the name it is given in the `RegisterExtension` call?

_each time_ the precompile is imported into a schema. If a node is restarted, all precompiles for all persisted schemas are re-initialized.

2. **Call**: The action precompile is called by its name (given during initialization), and is given a method name and a set of arguments.

> It then performs the requested action and returns a result. This can only be done after the precompile has been initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It then performs the requested action and returns a result to the Kuneiform schema. This can only be done after the precompile has been initialized.
```

Author: `Kuneiform Schema` shouldn't refer to deployed databases. A schema is simply that- the schema for a database

Precompiles must match the following function signature and interface. For more information on the available types, see the reference documententation for the common

> and action precopmiles packages. TODO: Add link to reference documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and action precompiles packages. TODO: Add link to reference documentation.
```

> Precompiles must match the following function signature and interface. For more information on the available types, see the reference documententation for the common
> and action precompiles packages. TODO: Add link to reference documentation.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Precompiles must match the following function signature and interface. For more information on the available types, see the reference documententation for the [common](/docs/extensions/api-reference/common)
and [action precompiles](/docs/extensions/api-reference/precompiles) packages.

```

// It is called when a Kuneiform schema is deployed that calls
// "use <precompile> {key: "value"} as <name>". It is also called
// when the node starts up, if a database is already deployed that
// uses the precompile. The key/value pairs are passed as the
// metadata parameter. When initialize is called, the dataset is not
// yet accessible.
type Initializer func(ctx *DeploymentContext, service *common.Service, metadata map[string]string) (Instance, error)

// Instance is a named initialized instance of a precompile. It is
// returned from the precompile initialization, as specified by the
// Initializer. It will exist for the lifetime of the deployed
// dataset, and a single dataset can have multiple instances of the
// same precompile.
type Instance interface {
	// Call executes the requested method of the precompile. It is up
	// to the instance implementation to determine if a method is
	// valid, and to subsequently decode the arguments. The arguments
	// passed in as args, as well as returned, are scalar values.
	Call(scoper *ProcedureContext, app *common.App, method string, inputs []any) ([]any, error)
}
```

## Using Precompiles in Kuneiform

### Import and Call

> Precompiles can be used in Kuneiform by importing them at the top of a schema file. They can then be called in actions, and can be passed parameters
> from the schema. Precompiles can be given initialization values when imported. This is done by passing a set of key-value pairs to the `use` statement. This
> creates an instance of the precompile with the given name. Multiple instances of the same precompile can be imported and used in the same schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Precompiles are used in Kuneiform by importing them at the top of a schema file. They are then called in actions, and can receive parameters
from the action. Precompiles can receive initialization values when imported via passing a set of key-value pairs to the `use` statement. This
creates an instance of the precompile with the given name. Multiple instances of the same precompile can be imported and used in the same schema.
```

```sql title="schema.kf"
database mydb;

> use custom_extension {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// import extension and pass initialization values
use custom_extension {
```

	key1: "value1"
	key2: "value2"
} as ext1;

use custom_extension {
	key1: "value3"
	key2: "value4"
} as ext2;

> action some_action($arg1) public {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// call extension within action
action some_action($arg1) public {
```
